Add Values and Representation chapter (#1664)
rust-lang/reference: src/memory-model.md

# Memory model

r[memory]

The Memory Model of Rust is incomplete and not fully decided. The following is some of the detail worked out so far.

## Bytes

r[memory.byte]

r[memory.byte.intro]

> The most basic unit of memory in Rust is a byte. All values in Rust are computed from 0 or more bytes read from an allocation.

Reviewer: Is "value" defined anywhere?

Author: Values are defined constructively, with each "class" of types. As mentioned in another comment, these are present in different chapters at the request of T-lang-doc and T-spec.

> [!NOTE]

> > While bytes in Rust are typically lowered to hardware bytes, they may contain additional values,
> > such as being uninitialized, or storing part of a pointer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> While bytes in Rust are typically lowered to hardware bytes, Rust uses an "abstract"
> notion of bytes that can make distinctions which are absent in hardware,
> such as being uninitialized, or storing part of a pointer.
```

r[memory.byte.init]

> Each byte may be initialized, and contain a value of type `u8`, as well as an optional pointer fragment. When present, the pointer fragment carries [provenance][type.pointer.provenance] information.

Reviewer: What is the difference between a "pointer fragment" and "provenance"? Wouldn't it be easier to just say, "[...] as well as optional provenance information"?

r[memory.byte.uninit]

> Each byte may be uninitialized.

Reviewer: It seems quite odd to split the definition of a "byte" over two separate items. It is very crucial that this list is exhaustive, and cannot be extended by some other clause somewhere else saying "a byte may also be X". So IMO this should be a single paragaph saying something like:

Each byte is described by one of the following cases:
- It is uninitialized.
- It is initialized, ...

Reviewer: We do want "machine-readable" names for the variants, fair. But making them separate paragraphs just feels entirely wrong. This should be a list, formatted like a list. Can we have lists where each item has a "name"?

> [!NOTE]
> Uninitialized bytes do not have a value and do not have a pointer fragment.

## Value Encoding

r[memory.encoding]

r[memory.encoding.intro]

> Each type in Rust has 0 or more values, which can have operations performed on them

Reviewer: This seems to be setting up for "memory.encoding", but really it defines the notion of a "value". I think that notion deserves a separate definition, in a `r[memory.value]`, which can then be referenced elsewhere. I am not fully convinced putting this in "memory" is the best choice, since one defining characteristic of values is that they do *not* exist in memory, but I also don't know the structure well enough to be able to suggest a better place.

This should then also give some sort of definition of a value. Something like:

A *value* in Rust describes a high-level, "mathematical" view on data at a given type. Examples of values include:
- mathematical integers
- Boolean truth values
- A tuple of values of potentially different types
- A homogeneous list of values of identical type

This list is not exhaustive; as Rust evolves, more kinds of values can be added.

Author: This used to be one chapter that fully defined value. I was asked to move those definitions to the respective type chapters to avoid duplication.

Reviewer: Having the encode/decode defined with each type makes sense IMO. But the concept of a value is a central concept that should be defined somewhere. Having the list of "what is a value" spread out is fine (after all, my suggestion already said that the list is non-exhaustive), but the central definition should give *some* examples of what values are, just to make it understandable and to clearly differentiate it from "sequence of bytes".

Author: I'm not sure that there is a good place for the definition of value.

Reviewer: We can put it in memory-model.md for now. It should go together with encode/decode and those already live there.

> [!NOTE]
> `0u8`, `1337i16`, and `Foo{bar: "baz"}` are all values

r[memory.encoding.op]
Each value of a type can be encoded into a sequence of bytes, and decoded from a sequence of bytes, which has a length equal to the size of the type.

> The operation to encode or decode a value is determined by the representation of the type.

Reviewer: The representation relation does not determine encode/decode, since there can be more than one representation of a value -- encode makes the choice of which representation to pick. So it's the other way around, encode/decode determine the representation relation.

I would phrase this to be more centered around types, not values. Something like:

Each type defines an operation to *decode* a sequence of bytes into a value, and to *encode* a value into a sequence of bytes. When a sequence of bytes decodes to a value, we say that it *represents* that value. A value that is valid for a given type may be represented by multiple different sequences of bytes, and a sequence of bytes may represent 0 or 1 values of any given type.

Author: The only thing is that most of the other chapters will define just representation to get both at once. I'd like to preserve this ability.

Author: Although in most cases, simply defining the decoding should suffice as `decode(T, encode(T, val))` is defined to round-trip `val` later.

Reviewer: > The only thing is that most of the other chapters will define just representation to get both at once. I'd like to preserve this ability.

Formally speaking, that's sloppy. If we say that every type has encode and decode, we have to say explicitly how they are defined anywhere.

> Although in most cases, simply defining the decoding should suffice as decode(T, encode(T, val)) is defined to round-trip val later.

So then I would suggest that these types have something like
```
r[<>.repr.decode]
...

r[<>.repr.encode]
The encoding of a value is the unique sequence of bytes that decodes back to the value
```

However, note that for most types there is no unique such sequence (since decode often ignores provenance). With more setup we could define the encoding as the unique minimal sequence of bytes that decodes back to the value, where "minimal" uses an ordering that sets "uninit < init(no-provenance) < init(with-provenance)".

> [!NOTE]
> Representation is related to, but is not the same property as, the layout of the type.

r[memory.encoding.decode]

> If a value of type `T` is decoded from a sequence of bytes that does not correspond to a defined value, the behavior is undefined. If a value of type `T` is decoded from a sequence of bytes that contain pointer fragments, which are not used to represent the value, the pointer fragments are ignored.

Reviewer: The second sentence should IMO not be mentioned here. This is not a defining property of our representation relation, it is just the choice we made for some representations.

Put differently: "pointer fragment which are not used to represent the value" is not a defined notion, and actually precisely defining this is a lot more work than just stating the relevant part with each type.

r[memory.byte.uninit]
* An uninitialized byte.

> [!NOTE]
> Uninitialized bytes do not have a value and do not have a pointer fragment.

> [!NOTE]
> The above list is not yet guaranteed to be exhaustive.

## Value Encoding

r[memory.encoding]

r[memory.encoding.intro]
Each type in Rust has 0 or more values, which can have operations performed on them. Values are represented in memory by encoding them

> [!NOTE]
> `0u8`, `1337i16`, and `Foo{bar: "baz"}` are all values

r[memory.encoding.op]
Each type defines a pair of properties which, together, define the representation of values of the type. The *encode* operation takes a value of the type and converts it into a sequence of bytes equal in length to the size of the type, and the *decode* operation takes such a sequence of bytes and optionally converts it into a value. Encoding occurs when a value is written to memory, and decoding occurs when a value is read from memory.

> [!NOTE]
> Only certain byte sequences may decode into a value of a given type. For example, a byte sequence consisting of all zeroes does not decode to a value of a reference type.

r[memory.encoding.representation]

> A sequence of bytes is said to represent a value of a type, if the decode operation for that type produces that value from that sequence of bytes. The representation of a type is the partial relation between byte sequences and values those sequences represent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sequence of bytes is said to represent a value of a type, if the decode operation for that type produces that value from that sequence of bytes. The representation of a type is the partial relation between byte sequences and values those sequences represent.
This relation is functional, i.e., a given byte sequence represents at most one value.
```

Reviewer: If we do decide to define decoding as the unique minium value, we could possibly even reduce this definition to just say, for each type there is a representation function, which is a partial function that decodes a sequence of bytes into a corresponding value. And then we once-and-forall define the corresponding encode operation across all types.

> [!NOTE]

> > Representation is related to, but is not the same property as, the layout of the type.

Reviewer: I find this more confusing than helpful. What even exactly is the "layout" of a type, i.e. what is the mathematical type of a "layout"?

I am not sure what you are trying to achieve with this sentence. Here's my attempt at rewording:
```suggestion
> The representation of a type is determined by its layout. For instance, the layout of a struct defines the offsets of all its fields, and this in turn defines the representation of struct values as sequences of bytes.
```

Author: I'm attempting to explain someting to less mathetmatically-focused consumers of the reference. This is a non-normative note and therefore serves to explain or exemplify something about the preceeding paragraph.

Reviewer: What I wrote wasn't even very mathematical. ;)

I find your current note confusing. I don't know what you are trying to say, so I made a guess. I am also fine with removing it entirely, but if you want to keep it then please explain which point you are trying to make.
